Docs 5938 deployment v4.2 (#1043)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/mule-deployment-model.adoc

> = Mule Application Deployment Model

Reviewer: I think this title is misleading, because it implies a mode for all app deployment but is actually about only on-premises deployment.

> = Mule Application Deployment Model

Reviewer: I think this title is misleading, because it implies a mode for all app deployment but is actually about only on-premises deployment.
Therefore, I think you can omit the solitary subtopic (==On-Premises Deployments), change the title above to specify on-premises, and then promote all your existing === titles to ==.

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:keywords: anypoint studio, esb, deploy, architecture

Mule application deployment consists of two main aspects:

* The Mule runtime engine instance
* The Mule applications deployed to that Mule instance

> When you deploy applications to CloudHub or to Anypoint Runtime Fabric, these services take care of the Mule runtime engine instances needed to run applications.

Reviewer: Consider omitting all of this in favor of focusing on the on-premise deployment.
See above.

> When you deploy applications to CloudHub or to Anypoint Runtime Fabric, these services take care of the Mule runtime engine instances needed to run applications.

Reviewer: Consider omitting all of this in favor of focusing on the on-premise deployment.
See above.

> When you deploy applications on-premises, you are responsible of the installation and configuration of the Mule runtime engine instances that run your Mule applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you deploy applications on-premises, you are responsible for the installation and configuration of the Mule runtime engine instances that run your Mule applications. Because you have complete control of the on-premise instance (unlike with CloudHub or Runtime Fabric deployments), you must understand the characteristics specific to on-premises deployments.
```

== On-Premises Deployments

> The following characteristics are specific of Mule runtime engine instances, they only apply for on-premises deployments where you have complete control of the Mule instance.

Reviewer: omit in favor of previous suggestion

> === Running Multiple Applications in one Mule Instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Running Multiple Applications in One Mule Instance
```

> === Running Multiple Applications in one Mule Instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Running Multiple Applications in One Mule Instance
```

> One instance of Mule runtime engine can run multiple applications, enabling you to include the same namespaces within different applications that neither collide nor share information, which allows additional advantages such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One instance of Mule runtime engine can run multiple applications, enabling you to include the same namespaces within different applications that neither collide nor share information, which provides additional advantages such as:
```

> * You can break down a complex application into several Mule apps with their specific logic, and then deploy the Mule apps in the same Mule instance

Reviewer: Periods at the ends of list items that are complete sentences:
```suggestion
* You can break down a complex application into several Mule apps with their specific logic, and then deploy those several Mule apps in one Mule instance.
```

> * You can break down a complex application into several Mule apps with their specific logic, and then deploy the Mule apps in the same Mule instance

Reviewer: Periods at the ends of list items that are complete sentences:
```suggestion
* You can break down a complex application into several Mule apps with their specific logic, and then deploy those several Mule apps in one Mule instance.
```

> * Clear boundaries for running operations on what a Mule application is

Reviewer: Is there text missing after "is"?
Also, to make this list item parallel:
```suggestion
* Boundaries for running operations on what a Mule application is //[missing?] are clear.//
```

> * Mule runtime engine monitors your Mule applications and reloads configuration changes automatically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Mule runtime engine monitors your Mule applications and reloads configuration changes automatically.
```

> * Applications can depend on different library versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Applications can depend on different library versions.
```

* Multiple versions of an application can run within the same Mule instance.

> === Application Package and Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Application Package and Deployment
```

> Mule runtime engine unpacks all applications at runtime, removes the original `jar` files inside the `/apps` directory, creates a new folder for each application, and names each folder with the same name of the application file without having the `jar` extension.

Reviewer: I suggest that we not put these things in syntax text style, because they are being used in a general way, without refering to a specific syntax example or extended syntax: a JAR file, a .jar file, the /apps directory....
```suggestion
Mule runtime engine unpacks all applications at runtime, removes the original .jar files inside the /apps directory, creates a new folder for each application, and names each folder with the same name as the application file (minus the `.jar` extension).
```

> To confirm a successful deployment check the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To confirm successful deployment, verify the following:
```

> * The status of the application in the console is: `DEPLOYED`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The status of the application in the console is `DEPLOYED`.
```

> * An unpacked application folder in the `apps` directory of your Mule instance exists +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An unpacked application folder exists in the \apps directory of your Mule instance: for example, for `stockTrader.jar`, `$MULE_HOME/apps/stockTrader`. +
```

> For example, for `stockTrader.jar`- `$MULE_HOME/apps/stockTrader`.

Reviewer: omit, per above
```suggestion
```

> * An anchor file exists for a running app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An anchor file exists for a running app: for example, `$MULE_HOME/apps/stockTrader-anchor.txt`.
```

> For example, `$MULE_HOME/apps/stockTrader-anchor.txt`

Reviewer: omit, per above
```suggestion
```

If you want to store your applications in a different location, you can store them on Unix-based systems by creating a symlink to your application directory from `$MULE_HOME/apps`.

> === Application and Domain Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Application and Domain Deployment
```

> === Application and Domain Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Application and Domain Deployment
```

> Every application is deployed together within a *domain*. By default, your application references the `default` domain, and no further configuration is required. You can see that the domain is deployed with the Mule app in the console:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All applications are deployed together within a _domain_. By default, your application references the `default` domain, and no further configuration is required. You can see that the domain is deployed with the Mule app in the console:
```

> Every application is deployed together within a *domain*. By default, your application references the `default` domain, and no further configuration is required. You can see that the domain is deployed with the Mule app in the console:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All applications are deployed together within a _domain_. By default, your application references the `default` domain, and no further configuration is required. You can see that the domain is deployed with the Mule app in the console:
```

image::deploy-domain.png[deploy+domain]

> If you're deploying multiple applications to the same Mule instance, and the applications must share the same resources, then you can create a common *domain* to define configurations that can be referenced by multiple projects. This practice enables you to expose different services in different projects through the same HTTP host and port without causing any conflicts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're deploying multiple applications to the same Mule instance, and the applications must share the same resources, you can create a common domain to define configurations that can be referenced by multiple projects. This practice enables you to expose different services in different projects through the same HTTP host and port without causing conflicts.
```

> === Application Hot Deployment

Reviewer 2: The content of this section is explained with more detail in on-premises-deployment.adoc

Author: Additional info is added in PR https://github.com/mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime/pull/1044

> === Application Hot Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Application Hot Deployment
```

You can modify your Mule application's configuration files and custom classes and reload the app without having to restart Mule.

> Mule checks every three seconds for updated configuration files under the `$MULE_HOME/apps` directory, and when it finds one, it reloads the configuration file and the JARs in that application's `java` source directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every three seconds, Mule checks for updated configuration files in the `$MULE_HOME/apps` directory and, when it finds one, Mule reloads the configuration file and the JAR files in that application's `java` source directory.
```

+
If you start Mule and specify an app using the `mule.deploy.applications` property, the hot deployment process works only for the specified app.

To reload an application, you can:

> * Touch the anchor file of that application.

Reviewer: "touch"? Does this mean opening the file in the UI by clicking something?

> * Touch or update any of the Mule configuration files declared in the `mule-artifact.json` file.

Reviewer: ditto: not familiar with "touch"....

> For example, if you want to modify one of your custom classes, make your changes to the custom class, copy the updated class to the java directory, then touch the anchor file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to modify one of your custom classes, make your changes to the custom class, copy the updated class to the java directory, and then touch the anchor file.
```
ditto re. touch

> === Communication Between Mule Instances and the Management Pane

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Communication Between Mule Instances and the Management Pane
```

> Mule instances run independently from the Management pane to execute integration logic and serve API requests. This architecture enables you to deploy Mule runtime engine strategically and ensures it is not a bottleneck for any communications. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mule instances run independently from the Management pane to execute integration logic and serve API requests. This architecture enables you to deploy Mule runtime engine strategically and ensures that it is not a bottleneck to communications. +
```

> When an event occurs that causes the Mule instances to get disconnected from the Management pane, they continue to run as designed and execute integration and serve API without interruption. However, new or updated policies are not pulled and updated until the connection is re-established.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an event occurs that causes the Mule instances to become disconnected from the Management pane, the instances continue to run as designed to execute integration and serve APIs without interruption. However, new or updated policies are not pulled and updated until the connection is reestablished.
```

> When an event occurs that causes the Mule instances to get disconnected from the Management pane, they continue to run as designed and execute integration and serve API without interruption. However, new or updated policies are not pulled and updated until the connection is re-established.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an event occurs that causes the Mule instances to become disconnected from the Management pane, the instances continue to run as designed to execute integration and serve APIs without interruption. However, new or updated policies are not pulled and updated until the connection is reestablished.
```
